Avatar is a number of things, many of them great, even if the film isn’t quite the cinematic game changer Hollywood moguls would have you believe (certainly no more so than director James Cameron’s previous techno-feats Terminator 2 and Titanic). As entertainment goes, it is, above all else, extremely cheesy, and whether or not one enjoys the film largely comes down to their taste for this particular brand of unrestrained earnestness. Like the similarly larger-than-life storytelling of Titanic, it is a film drunk on its own excesses, and one that much better for it.

Not that Avatar succeeds quite like that last highest-grosser-of-all-time (inflation unadjusted) did; it can't match Titanic's artistry or depth of feeling, instead working as an engrossing yet hermetically sealed adventure. One deliberately Bushy line of dialogue aside (courtesy of the great Stephen Lang, whose villainous turn deserved an Oscar nomination), Avatar's similarities to current American affairs are no different than any other instance of a developed nation exploiting the quote-unquote uncivilized. That the film’s pro-green ideals are read as political speaks more to the rot of mainstream politics than the film itself.

If one judges plot by originality and unpredictability, Avatar's doesn't have much going for it, but as an unpretentiously eager retelling of the familiar, it succeeds quite admirably. (Recounting the plot here seems rather trite given the generally widespread knowledge.) Dummies get hung up on the similarity to FernGully (a non-conversation that should have ended after the initial, witty trailer mash-up), ditto the parallels to Pocahontas (or rather, The New World). Avatar revels in the archetypal broadness of its story, hoping to instill itself in your mind as something of a pre-existing classic, even as it unfolds for the first time. For the most part, it works.

Let's address the three-dimensional elephant in the room: Avatar looks better at home on the flat screen than it did in theatrical 3D (this writer was one of the unlucky 15% who experienced “visual discomfort”, i.e. the worst headache of my relatively short life; I know someone who burst a blood vessel in their eye!), away from the murky visuals associated with 3D projection and nausea-inducing used of artificial focus. Why create some of the most scintillatingly detailed effects ever seen in a movie only to by and large blob them out of existence with an unnecessary gimmick? To make more money, of course. Good storytelling is truly immersive; literally immersive 3D is a hyped-up Happy Meal toy.

Two-dimensionally speaking, Avatar is nearly a visual masterpiece, a Metropolis-like spectacle. Sure, it largely mimics the artwork of Roger Dean, which is another way of saying that this alien world is entrancing without being overwhelming, a pleasing quality given the difficulty of adjusting to watching photorealistic blue people scampering across the scream for nearly three hours. The life forms of Pandora are little more than slightly varied versions of numerous Earthly counterparts, yet this isn't a hindrance to the efforts on display. If the far-away world of Pandora were any more alien in design (the flora and fauna are luminescent and glow when walked upon [like the sidewalk in Michael Jackson’s “Billie Jean” video], while most animals have six legs, etc.), Avatar might prove visually top-heavy for its simple trajectory; the relative recognizability of this world allows the similarly stripped-down story to function that much more effortlessly.


Like the similarly imperfect but awesome Titanic, Avatar points to Cameron’s strengths and weaknesses, the latter most prominent in perfunctory dialogue that too often hits the thematic nail on the head (and again, and again, in case you didn’t get it the first three times). Humorous touches are a frequently embarrassing spot as well (off-the-cuff humor never sounded so forced and rehearsed), but these blemishes are largely overwhelmed by capable performances that embrace the material’s B-movie pulp, lending it conviction and gravitas. F/X programmers can be thanked for much of the emotional impact (the Na’Vi are as expressive as anything put on the screen since the original Kong rampaged through New York), but Zoe Saldana and Sam Worthington’s ground work is equally game, and has sadly gone unnoticed in the wake of the film’s technical accomplishments.

Coming from a director who has routinely raised the bar on visual possibilities in the cinema and exhibits equally jaw-dropping budget-stretching abilities, Avatar can't help but pale, if only somewhat, in comparison to its meat-and-potatoes predecessors. For all the digital bravura abound, there remains more passion and feeling in the whatever-it-takes mechanics of The Terminator's threadbare makeup and piecemeal physical effects. Hype and overly zealous fans be equally damned, Avatar remains a fine, if flawed, film, one that will remain in memory less for its artistic than its technical achievements, however considerable both may be. Cameron is only arguably King of the World, but he impressively remains master of his own.

Where were you when you caught your first glimpse of Avatar? Like millions, I was sitting in front of my computer screen watching the first clips released to the public. Upon seeing the Thundercats-Smurfs hybrid characters and listening to the cheesy dialogue, my expectations were lessened significantly. Instead of some fancy east coast lobster, I was thinking more Big Mac. I still had some faith seeing as how James Cameron's track record is solid to amazing (yes, I like even Titanic). With the runaway success of the film, obviously something was missing from those early clips, something that could only be captured over the course of an epic feature. Avatar is a marvel. Sure, the main characters still look like rejects from 1980s-era Saturday morning cartoons and the dialogue is frequently iffy at best, but there's also a magic about the film. It's rare that a movie can inspire genuine awe but Cameron has succeeded in another landmark technical achievement.

AvatarSome time in the future, the moon of Pandora is a resource rich site for needy humans. Pandora is where the very valuable Unobtainium is found, thus it becomes a place of imperialistic invasions. Needing to appease and win over the local Na'vi, the military starts a program that has humans controlling organic sort-of robots to enter the mystical culture of giants. Normally requiring extensive training and careful matching between humans and their avatars, wheelchair-bound Jake Sully (Sam Worthington) steps into the role quickly following the death of his brother. Destiny steps in and Jake is thrust into the middle of the Na'vi culture, seemingly preordained to be the difference maker in the looming conflict between the business-minded human interests and the harmonic Na'vi.

AvatarThe story is simple. Very simple. Some might say too simple. Think Dances with Futuristic Blue Wolves in snazzy CG. But some of the most powerful films with lasting impact can be labeled as "simple." Star Wars, Titanic and any Michael Bay blockbuster can be summed up in a nutshell. They're often mocked. Pauline Kale spent an entire book arguing Citizen Kane's greatness didn't come in its perfection. One could even argue that Cameron's original Terminator was simply a movie about a robot coming back in time to kill someone. Films don't need to be complex all the time. Granted, I like it when something challenges me. But this can be achieved in different ways. Avatar works on a level of imagination and spirit. It challenges the Western system of Imperialism in a way that's direct and could be used as a teaching tool for history teachers.

AvatarWhat Avatar might suffer from in its directness to its themes, it should also be looked at for its mastery of visuals. Much has already been written of the film's spectacle and there's no hyperbole in asserting its groundbreaking look. Going forward, I am quietly cussing Cameron under my breath for showing Hollywood how profitable 3D can be now that seemingly everything is headed in that direction as executives look for breadcrumbs. I can only imagine a couple years down the road: Driving Miss Daisy: The Prequel where we watch for two hours as five-year-old Hoke pulls Daisy around the neighborhood in a wagon to get ice cream, all in glorious 3D. I guess who could blame them? Just attach the two letters to a commercial and everything is turning into gold.

I'm not a fan of hype. It's ultimately empty and rarely rewarding. In the case of Avatar, the initial push worked against it for me, at least to lessen expectations. But there I still was, opening week, near the front of a packed theatre, blown away by the achievement. The Na'vi still look weird and the dialogue is still pretty awful at times, but there's a lot more to Avatar to marvel at. It captures the possibility of film and takes the format to uncharted places.Avatar Blu-rayIt has been widely written that this is just the first of possibly many home releases for Avatar. As a result, you get the movie and nothing else. For some, that's enough. Others may want to wait for the inevitable tricked out editions and later 3D versions. The Avatar Blu-ray is simply spectacular. The high definition 1080p widescreen picture is nothing short of perfect, capturing all the detail of the film and showing that it can hold up, even when it's not in 3D. The sound is equally great, captured in English 5.1 DTS-HD Master Audio. Additional language tracks are in Spanish, French and Portuguese 5.1 Dolby Digital and English descriptive audio. Subtitles are offered in each of the same languages except French. The Avatar Blu-ray is also a combo pack that includes a second disc with the film on DVD. 

Avatar demonstrates just how much the world of mainstream Hollywood action filmmaking has suffered without James Cameron active the last decade-plus. With emptily chaotic, hyperactively-edited sound-and-fury mayhem now being the norm, it's a bit jarring--and, ultimately, quite refreshing--how Cameron, while still working at a snappy pace, takes his usual time to establish a groundwork on the page upon which to build the huge set pieces. On one side are the humans, who with the backing of private military might have come to the planet Pandora to harvest the valuable mineral "unobtanium"; on the other, the indigenous humanoid race of the Na'vi, who are literally one with the planet's nature. Caught in between is Jake Sully (Sam Worthington), a paraplegic ex-Marine who, via psychically-linked alien avatar body, infiltrates a Na'vi clan in a token effort to negotiate a peaceful relocation but ends up learning more about the universe and himself than he expected.

As can be gleaned from the above, Cameron is more ambitious in general concept than actual characterization, as the players here are all familiar types--especially on the human end, where Cameron borrows liberally from his own Aliens, what with the gung-ho military types (including a Vasquez-esque tough Latina, here played by--who else?--Michelle Rodriguez) and a slimy corporate bastard all about the business (here, Giovanni Ribisi in for Paul Reiser). Archetypes are abound elsewhere: Jake is the white man who learns to expand his thoughts and visions of the universe from the seemingly "savage" but noble and wise natives; his "teacher" is Neytiri (Zoë Saldana), a young Na'vi female who recalls Disney's Pocahontas in her "Colors of the Wind"-esque curriculum, fiery strength, and lithe sensuality; and Neytiri's clan has its noble elder leader and shaman figures, not unlike one would find in Native American tribes, especially those in films.

But as what has set Cameron films apart in the past, it's in the execution of standard tropes and his skill with actors that the film becomes distinctive and involving. For the first time this is a film that I think truly deserves the preferred "performance capture" label over the more commonly used "motion capture" one, as the Na'vi do come off not so much as computer-generated creations (see: any Robert Zemeckis-directed mo-cap endeavor) than true (pardon the pun) avatars for genuine dramatic performances. In Na'vi form, every nuance of expression from Wes Studi (as Neytiri's father and clan leader), CCH Pounder (as her mother), Laz Alonso (as Neytiri's intended, a fierce warrior), Worthington, Sigourney Weaver (as the head human scientist who also has an avatar), and especially Saldana comes through, and as such are able to create not only believable characters but relationships between them. Aiding immeasurably is Cameron's resounding success where Zemeckis has failed repeatedly: in giving the eyes warmth and life, which--for all the incredible FX work on display in crafting the world of Pandora--is perhaps the biggest technological breakthrough in a film full of them.

And so it's almost beside the point to comment on how astounding a technical achievement this is, which is made even more impressive and overwhelmingly immersive in the preferred format of digital 3-D, especially when Cameron has quite literally built his career on breaking new technological ground on each successive film. Where Cameron has also consistently delivered the goods and not always gotten his due credit is his ability to structure a scenario on the page, not just in taking time to set up the world and the characters but really allowing a story's tension and momentum to gradually, organically crescendo to an all-out and well-earned finish. There are some effective early action set pieces, but they all are a mere warm-up to a spectacular final third, which indeed delivers the slam-bang audiovisual goods in a huge way but also--crucially--brings the story and characters to a satisfying climax.

Where Avatar falls a little short is in the romance between Jake and Neytiri, which while compelling doesn't resonate as strongly as the emotional cores of many of his previous films, whether the traditional romantic love stories of a Titanic, The Abyss, or The Terminator (or even True Lies); or his dual epic sequel tributes to maternal love, Aliens and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. But their relationship and that between all the characters is still a lot more substantial and clearly drawn than most action films, and hence offers uncommon heft with its thrills. And are there ever thrills--in the end, though, the film is that fun, entertaining, satisfying ride and cinematic experience it promises to be, even if not exactly "the adventure of a lifetime" as the marketing/hype rather hyperbolically states.
